<<enter version number>>  
<<enter issue date>>                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Occupational Health  Service    
Guidance on making referral s using OHIO  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             Occupational Health Service  
             Guidance on making referral s using OHIO   
 
CONTENTS  
 
Version 3.0                                          Page 1 of 16                                                   May 2017  1. GETTING STARTED  2 - 4 
 
Accessing OHIO   
2 
Logging in as a new user  3 
Changing your password  3 
If you forget your password  3 
OHIO home page  
 4 
2. MAKING A MANAGEMENT REFERRAL  5 - 9 
 
Create an employee record  
Access the record of the employee you’re referring  
Complete the referral form  
  
5 
6 
7-9 
 
3. MAKING A WORKSTATION/  DSE ASSESSMENT REFERRAL  10 - 11 
 
Create  an employee record  
Access the record of the employee you’re referring  
Complet e the referral form  
  
10 
10 
10-11 
4. MAKING A PHYSIOTHERAPY REFERRAL  (PHIL)  12 - 13 
 
Creat e an employee record  
Access  the record of the employee you’re referring  
Complet e the referral form  
  
12 
12 
13 
5. ACCESSING A CONSULTATION REPORT  14 - 15 
 
Access the employee record  
View the consultation report  
Printing or saving the consultation report   
14 
15 
15 
 
6. MAINT AINING  OHIO RECORDS  16 
 
Leavers  
Transfers  
  
16 
16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Occupational Health Service  
Guidance on making referral s using OHIO  
 
1. Getting started  
Version 3.0                                          Page 2 of 16                                                   May 2017   
Access OHIO  
 
Click on the following web link:  www.ohiosystems.co.uk , which will take you to the OHIO landing page 
below:  
 
 
 
 
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The PAM OHIO icon will appear on your desktop 
giving you quick click access to the OHIO landing 
page.  
 
 
 
*            Tip:   Add a shortcut to your desktop:  
 
o Right click on any white area of the OHIO 
homepage.  
o From the menu options, select ‘Create 
Shortcut’.  
o Select ‘Yes’ when prompted.  
 
 
 
Occupational Health Service  
Guidance on making referral s using OHIO  
 
1. Getting started  
Version 3.0                                          Page 3 of 16                                                   May 2017   
Login as a new user  
 
You will have received an automatically generated temporary password by e -mail which will let you login to the 
OHIO system as follows:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Changing your password  
 
Once you have logged in using the temporary password, you will be prompted you change your 
password to a permanent one of your own choosing.  
 
 
 
 
             e.g.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If you forget your password  
 
If you forget your password, you can get the system to provide you with a new temporary one to 
enable you to login.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If you have any other problems logging in, please contact the OHIO Support Line: 0845 6435331  
 
 
 
 
o Enter your Username and Password in the 
login box at the top right hand side of the 
landing page screen.  
o Your Username  is your full GCC e -mail 
address and must be entered in lower case 
letters only .  
o Passwords are case sensitive so take care to 
enter it exactly as shown in your e -mail.  
o Once you have entered your Username and 
Password, click on the ‘Login’ tab.  
 
 
o Your password must be a minimum of 7 characters and 
contain at least one capital  letter and one number.  
o Ensure that it is something familiar and unique only to 
you, and something that you aren’t likely to forget.  
o Remember that passwords are case sensitive, so make 
sure that you enter it exactly each time.  
 
 
 
 Smith1997  
 
o Type your e -mail address in the ‘Username’ field in the 
login box.  
o Select ‘Forgot Password’.  
o A new temporary password will be generated by OHIO 
and sent to you by e -mail.  
o You should use the temporary password to login, then 
change it to your own as above.  

Occupational Health Service  
Guidance on making referral s using OHIO  
 
1. Getting started  
Version 3.0                                          Page 4 of 16                                                   May 2017   
OHIO Home Page  
 
Once you have logged into the system you will be directed to your own Home Page:  
 
 
 
 
 
The manager’s ‘dashboard’ is situated directly below the menu bar. It provides an overview of 
information and alerts that enable you to keep track of what’s happening with referrals you have made 
and employee health surveillance requirements if applicable.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
o The blue bar at the top of the page shows the main areas of the website . 
 
o There are additional  drop down menus with links to the key functions.  
 
Occupational Health Service  
Guidance  on making  referral s using OHIO  
 
2. Making a management referral  
Version 3.0                                          Page 5 of 16                                                   May 2017  
 
Create an employee record  
 
If it’s the first time the employee has been referred to Occupational Health using OHIO, they won’t 
have a personal record on the system so you will have to create one for them. You can do this by 
following the steps below:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The ‘Add New Employee’ page will appear:   
  
   You must  provide the following:  
    
- Person ID  (employee SAP number)  
- Title 
- Gender  
- Forename, Surname  
- DoB  
- Address 1  
- Postcode  
- Telephone  
- Mobile  
- Reminder method  
- Client (select from the dropdown  list) 
- Job Title   
           
 Do not complete any other field  
 
 
You will already have met with the employee to confirm the details, and have the information recorded 
on the Employee Information Pro forma . PAM will be unable to proceed with the referral until the  
employee’s full postal address and telephone numbers  are provided . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The employee record has been created.  
  
  
 
o Hover your mouse over the ‘Client Area’ 
tab to reveal the drop down menu.  
o Hover over ‘Employees’  
o Click on ‘Add New Employee’ .  
 
 
o Check that you have provided all the 
information required.  
o Scroll along to the far right of the screen 
and click on ‘Save’.  
o The employee has been added to the 
system  and you can now make a referral 
for them.  
 This is the number 
the employee will be 
contacted on .    
Occupational Health Service  
Guidance  on making  referral s using OHIO  
 
2. Making a management referral  
Version 3.0                                          Page 6 of 16                                                   May 2017   
Access the record of the employee you are referring  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
o Go to your Home Page.  
o Hover your mouse over the ‘Client 
Area’ tab to reveal the drop down 
menu.  
o Hover your mouse over 
‘Management Referrals’.  
o Click on ‘Add New Referral’ .  
 
 
o Type the employee’s Surname  
 
o Click on the ‘Search’ tab  
 
 
 
 
 
o A link to the employee’s record will 
appear as shown.  
o Check the full name and date of 
birth to ensure that you have the 
correct person’s record.  
o Scroll to  the ‘Action’ column on the 
far right of the row and click on 
‘Select’.  
 
 
 
 
 
Occupational Health Service  
Guidance  on making  referral s using OHIO  
 
2. Making a management referral  
Version 3.0                                          Page 7 of 16                                                   May 2017   
Complete the online referral form  
 
Once you have added the employee to OHIO  or selected an employee’s record, the first part of the 
online referral form will appear on the screen. This is where you will provide information about the 
employee who is being referred.  
 
You will already have this information captured on the Employee I nformation Pro forma completed at 
your meeting with the employee.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
employee@gasgow.gov.uk  
You must click ‘Yes’ to confirm that you 
have met with the employee and have 
advised them that a referral will be 
arranged.  
 Click ‘Yes’ to confirm that you have 
verified the details with the employee 
at your meeting with them.  
 
Click on 
light bulb 
icon for 
helpful 
tips 
 
If the employee is not currently in work 
you will need to provide the dates in the 
above fields.  
 
Check that you have 
provided all the required 
information and click on 
‘Continue’  
    
Employee name, address  
 
This should be marked ‘yes’  
 
Occupational Health Service  
Guidance  on making  referral s using OHIO  
 
2. Making a management referral  
Version 3.0                                          Page 8 of 16                                                   May 2017   
 
The second part of the online referral form will appear on the screen. This is where you provide information on 
the referral.  
 
  
Select the appropriate checkbox to 
indicate the reason for referral.  
 
Please provide  information relevant to the referral:  
 
 e.g. the reason for absence, if applicable;  
 the condition/issue you’re seeking advice on;  
 supports explored;  
 any further questions not included above.  
 
***Important:  Please also indicate:   
 any dates/times when the employee may be 
unavailable ; and  
 the date of a disciplinary hearing (if applicable) so 
that PAM can try to ensure that an appointment is 
conducted and a report is available prior to that 
date.  
. 
Ignore  
Select ‘Management Referra l’ 
It may be helpful to discuss the case with the clinician before 
and/or after the consultation.  
 
If you want the clinician to contact you, click the ‘Yes’ box.  
 
*** Remember to provide your contact telephone number.  
Occupational Health Service  
Guidance  on making  referral s using OHIO  
 
2. Making a management referral  
Version 3.0                                          Page 9 of 16                                                   May 2017   
The third part of the online referral form is where you provide any management information relating to the case:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tick appropriate boxes to indicate the advice 
you require.  
Click ‘Choose File’ tab to attach 
any relevant supporting 
documents. For example, this 
may be a letter issued to the 
employee outlining support 
offered, or a job description.  Select ‘Submit’. 
The following 
message will pop 
up to confirm that 
the referral has 
been submitted.  Ignore  
Once you have chosen the file, 
click on ‘Upload’  Provide previous absence history you think 
is relevant to the referral.  
Occupational Health Service  
Guidance on making referral s using OHIO  
 
3. Making a workstation/DSE assessment referral  
Version 3.0                                          Page 10 of 16                                                   May 2017   
Create an employee record  
 
If it is the first time the employee has been referred to Occupational Health using OHIO, then you will 
have to create a record for them as descri bed above in Section 2 Making a management referral – 
Create an employee record.  
 
Access the record of the employee you are referring  
 
If you are searching for an employee who you know has an existing record on OHIO, then you should  
select “Client Area” and “Employees” tick the check digit “See All” and type in employee’s name .  
 
  
Select “View”, the display will only show the employee basic details, not giving access to Consultation 
Reports tab. To change this, scroll to the bottom of the employee screen and see “Authorised 
Managers” and “Referring Managers”. Your name should appear  in the left hand box.  
Click on 
your 
name 
and click the transfer arrow     to move it to the right hand box.   
Now press and you will become a Referring Manager and be given full access to the employee file.  
 
            
Select  
  
 Tick See All  
  

Occupational Health Service  
Guidance on making referral s using OHIO  
 
3. Making a workstation/DSE assessment referral  
Version 3.0                                          Page 11 of 16                                                   May 2017   
Select the ‘Work station Assessment’ option from the list by clicking in the tick box.  
 
 
 
On the following screen, you should then click ‘refer’:  
 
 
 
 
Complete the online referral form  
 
This will take you to the Health Surveillance referral page where you will complete the referral form as 
normal. See Section 2 Making a management referral – Complete the online referral form.  
 
 

Occupational Health Service  
Guidance on making referral s using OHIO  
 
4. Making a physiotherapy referral (PHIL)  
Version 3.0                                          Page 12 of 16                                                   May 2017   
Create an employee record  
 
If it is the first time the employee has been referred to Occupational Health using OHIO, then you will 
have to create a record for them as described a bove in Section 2 Making a management referral – 
Create an employee record.  
 
 
Access the record of the employee you are referring to PHIL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
o Hover your mouse over the ‘Client Area’ 
tab to reveal the drop down menu.  
o Hover over ‘PHIL Referrals’  
 
 
 
o Click  on ‘Add New PHIL Referral’ .  
 
 
o Type the employee’s Surname and 
DoB 
 
o Click on the ‘Search’ tab  
 
 
 
 
 
o A link to the employee’s record will 
appear as shown.  
o Scroll to the ‘Action’ column on the far 
right of the row and click on ‘Select’.  
 
 
 
 
 
Occupational Health Service  
Guidance on making referral s using OHIO  
 
4. Making a physiotherapy referral (PHIL)  
Version 3.0                                          Page 13 of 16                                                   May 2017   
Complete the online referral form  
 
The online referral form will appear on the screen. You must ensure that you’ve discussed the referral 
with the employee prior to completing the form. Use the information captur ed on the Employee 
Information pro forma to help you complete the referral form.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Click ‘Yes’ to confirm that you have checked the details 
provided are correct.  
 
Ignore  
Include the reason for referral; details  of any related absences; any other 
information you think is relevant.  
 
Ensure that you note any dates/times the employee will be unavailable for 
the consultation.  
 
Ignore  
Check that all the details provided are 
correct and click on ‘Conti nue’ 
 The following message will pop up to confirm 
that the referral has been submitted  
Occupational Health Service  
Guidance on making a referral  using OHIO  
 
5. Accessing a consultation report  
Version 3.0                                          Page 14 of 16                                                   May 2017  
 
Once a consultation has taken place, the clinician will upload the report onto OHIO. You can access 
the report as follows:  
 
Access the employee’s record  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
o Type the employee’s Surname  
o Click on the ‘Search’ tab  
 
 
 
  
o Go to your Home Page.  
o Hover your mouse over the ‘Client Area’ 
tab to reveal the drop down menu.  
o Click ‘Employees’  
 
 
 
o Locate the correct 
employee link.  
o Click on ‘View’.  
o The employee’s record will 
appear on the screen.  
o Select the ‘Consultation 
Reports’ tab  
Occupational Health Service  
Guidance on making a referral  using OHIO  
 
5. Accessing a consultation report  
Version 3.0                                          Page 15 of 16                                                   May 2017   
View the report  
 
A list of consultation reports for the employee will appear. You can choose the report by clicking on 
the appropriate file name link:  
 
 
 
 
You can print a copy of the report if required .  
 

Occupational Health Service  
Guidance on making a referral  using OHIO  
 
6. Maintaining OHIO records   
Version 3.0                                          Page 16 of 16                                                   May 2017   
It is critical that CBS are notified of  any structural changes within your team  which result in you no 
longer being responsible  for the referral of an employee /or group of employees  or existing 
occupational health records on  OHIO. This is to ensure that the required steps are taken to ensure 
that confidential employee records are protected and securely stored at all times.  
 
Leavers : 
 
If an employee you have previously referred to occupational health on OHIO leaves the Council, you 
must notify CBS by clearly indicating this on the employee’s  Exit Processing  form. The employee’s  
occupational health record will be safely archive d on OHIO , and your access to that particular record 
will be terminated in line with our information security policy and procedures.   
 
This form will also be used to if you leave the Counci l and will ensure  that any existing access to 
employee records and any referral responsibilities you have are re -allocated to the appropriate 
manger.  
 
Transfers : 
 
If an employee /or group of employees  transfer s within the Council and you a re no longer their line 
manager, you must complete and submit the Transfer Processing  form so that your access and 
responsibility for  maintaining those records can be  terminated and re-allocated to their new manager.    
 
Similarly, you must complete and submit this form if you transfer within the Council and are no longer 
responsible for existing employee (s) records or referrals. This will ensure that  access to  employee 
records and referral responsibilities can be re -allocated to another manager.  
 
 
 
  
