OFFICIAL  
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL  
1 
Version 2.0        February 2025  
                                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Supporting  Attendance Policy  
OFFICIAL  
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL  
2 
Version 2.0        February 2025  
                                    Policy Aims and Objectives  
 
1.1. Glasgow City Council is committed to delivering high quality 
services to the City and citizens of Glasgow.  This policy aims to 
support our employees to maintain high levels of attendance, 
thereby minimising the detrimental effects of sickness absence on 
our service provision, our citizens and colleagues.  
 
1.2. The Council recognise s that employees will experience periods of ill 
health from time to time which will result in absences from work.  In 
many cases, these will be short spells of illness from which 
employees quickly recover and in others there may be more 
significant health p roblems requiring prolonged treatment and time 
away from the workplace.  Application of this policy will ensure that 
attendance issues are managed in a fair, legal and consistent 
manner across all Council Services.  
 
1.3. In all cases Glasgow City Council is committed to supporting 
employee attendance levels for two main purposes:  
 
• to respond effectively to actual and potential problems with 
service delivery and  
• provide assistance to employees with health problems at an 
early stage.    
 
1.4. The Council recognises its responsibility for the health, safety and 
well-being of its employees and in conjunction with other policies 
and contracted service providers seeks to support employees 
suffering from both physical and psychological health problems.  
 
Standards of Attendance  
 
2.1 The Organisation will set Council  and Service attendance targets 
and the Chief Executive, Executive Directors and all levels of management will be responsible for ensuring that these are 
achieved.  
 
Note:  The standards set are not a target for each individual employee to 
achieve but employees should strive to achieve the highest level of 
attendance possible.  However, where an employee's level of attendance 
regularly falls below the set targets, this may be an indication of an 
unsustainable level of sickness absence.   
 
Responsibilities and E xpectations  
 
3.1 The policy reaffirms the Council’s commitment to protecting the 
comprehensive sickness allowance provisions made for employees.  
While managers at all levels are responsible for the implementation 
of it, there is an expectation that employees will fully engage  with 
the policy; engaging with occupational health referrals, management 
discussion and agreed return to work plans, thus ensuring that the 
provisions are protected . 
 
Health Issues in the Workplace  
 
4.1 While this Policy predominantly addresses sickness absence, the 
principles will be applied where an employee develops a health 
problem which impacts on their ability to perform their duties despite 
having no associated periods of sickness absence.  
 
4.2 In such cases the employee should bring the matter to their 
manager’s attention at the earliest opportunity and the manager will 
consider how best to support the employee to maintain their 
attendance.  
  
 
OFFICIAL  
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL  
3 
Version 2.0        February 2025  
                                    Absence Reporting  
 
5.1 Employees must report all periods of sickness absence  via phone 
call as detailed in the Conditions of Service (Sickness Absence 
Leave and Pay), on 1st, 4th, 7th and every 7th day thereafter.  
 
5.2 Whilst  contact for the above notification stages, is calculated on 
calendar days, should your work location be closed, then contact 
must take place with your line manager on the next available day.  
 
Local arrangements for reporting may also be in place for non -
standard working patterns.  
 
5.3 When an employee reports their absence the line manager will 
identify how best to support them. The discussion will cover the 
following:  
 
• What is the reason for absence  and expected duration?  
• Has any m edical advice been sought ? 
• Is there anything we can do to help?  
• Are there any workplace issues contributing to absence ? 
• Are there outstanding work items that require to be 
completed ? 
• What is the expected return date if known?  
• When they are next due to make contact?  
• Are further supports required such as Employee Assistance 
Provider (EAP) , or an Occupational Health referral for 
musculoskeletal  issues?  
 
5.4 In order to give employees the best support , it will be appropriate i n 
most cases of psychological or musculoskeletal conditions to 
organise Wellbeing Support  arrangements . 
 
 The Return to Work Discussion  
 
6.1 Following every spell of sickness absence the line manager will 
meet the employee and engage in a return to work discussion:  
 
• Ideally this discussion will take place prior to undertaking 
duties on the day of the return to work or as soon as is 
reasonabl y practicable.  
• The manager will meet the returning employee to welcome 
them back to the workplace.  
• The meeting will be informal,  and the discussion will focus on 
the reasons for absence, fitness to return to work and any 
support required to facilitate the return to work.  
• A spell of absence will often require further intervention  under 
the terms of this policy, where possible the line manager 
should familiarise themselves with the next steps and 
communicate this to the employee during the discussion.  
• The self -certificate form will be completed at the close of the 
return to work discussion.  
 
Note:  It is important that return to work discussions take place close to the 
point of return to work to ensure that the employee is fit to return and 
identify if any support is required .  Unnecessary delays in arranging such 
meetings should be avoided.  
 
Attendance Review  
 
7.1 Attendance Reviews  will be arranged with employees where they 
meet one of the following review thresholds, including periods of 
industrial injury:  
 
• 3 certified absences with in 6 months or 5 certified absences 
within 12 months.  Note:  This criteria is not applied on a pro 
rata basis.  
OFFICIAL  
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL  
4 
Version 2.0        February 2025  
                                    • 6 working days (or hours equivalent) within 6 months or 8 
working days (or hours equivalent) within 12 months (applied 
on a pro rata basis); or  
• any period of unauthorised absences.  
 
7.2 Attendance Reviews  will be arranged promptly following the 
absence to which they relate to ensure that decisions taken are 
current and relevant . 
 
7.3 Employees may choose to be accompanied by a colleague or trade 
union representative to any formal meeting convened with 
management under the Supporting Attendance Policy.  
 
7.4 All attendance review s must be recorded using the appropriate  
paperwork.  
 
Management Considerations  
 
8.1 Throughout the attendance management process managers will 
consider appropriate interventions and reference to other Council 
Policies and arrangements to support recovery and return to work:  
 
• Arrangements to support mental health  and wellbeing  in the 
workplace  
• Engagement with Employee Assistance  Provider (EAP)  
• Occupational Health Referral  
• Health and Safety Policy  
• Work life Balance arrangements  
• Alcohol and Drugs Support  Policy  
• Bullying and Harassment Policy  
• Disability Guide  
 
Note:  This list is not exhaustive  
 Wellbeing Support Meeting  
 
9.1 The purpose of a Wellbeing Support Meeting  is to provide 
assistance to an employee at an early stage of certain  absence s as 
evidence shows that early intervention activity can aid an 
employee’ s recovery and increase the likelihood of a full recovery.  
 
9.2 Where an employee reports absent due to a psychological or 
musculoskeletal condition, the line manager will establish if a  
Wellbeing Support Meeting , Employee Assistance Provider referral 
or an Occupational Health Provider referral, is appropriate, referring 
to the  Occupation Health Service guidance for managers  for 
advice.  Where an absence is reported to be stress -related, the line 
manager should conduct a stress risk assessment with the 
employee to identify appropriate supports.  
 
9.3 A Wellbeing Support Meeting should take place  within 2 weeks of 
the first day of absence and will generally take the form of a face to 
face meeting  or via Microsoft Teams. T he line manager will 
establish  any further support that might be provided to assist the 
employee’s recovery and return to work, this is particularly important 
where workplace issues are identified.  
   
Employee Assistance  
 
10.1.  Glasgow City Council have contracted an Employee Assistance 
Provider (EAP) – PAM Assist  - to provide counselling and 
information services to employees.  
10.2.  In all cases of absence due to psychological conditions, line 
managers will remind employees of the EAP support services 
available and the routes  to make contact.  
10.3.  Periods of absence, particularly long term, can lead to anxiety about 
health, returning to work and finances.  Therefore it will often be 
OFFICIAL  
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL  
5 
Version 2.0        February 2025  
                                    appropriate to bring the EAP service to employee’s attention even 
when the absence is not related to mental health.  
10.4.  In cases of absence related to allegations of workplace bullying and 
harassment, the employee should be reminded of the contact 
details of the EAP’s dedicated Bullying and Harassment helpline.  
10.5.  In circumstances in which employees consent to EAP progress 
report s being submitted to management, the line manager will meet 
with the employee to discuss the content of the report.  
 
Occupational Health Consultation  
 
Attendance Management R elated  
 
11.1.  Glasgow City Council have a contracted Occupational Health 
Provider (OHP) to provide management with information and advice 
in relation to employee health and the workplace.  
 
11.2.  The primary role of occupational health is to provide independent 
management advice .  The undertaking of diagnosis and treatment 
lies with the employee’s primary health care provider (NHS).  
 
11.3.  In most absence situations, a  referral to occupational health will be 
made to establish:  
 
• The impact of the employee’s health condition on their ability 
to perform their duties  
• The likelihood of full recovery and time frame  
• A timescale for return to work  
• What duties the employee may be capable of performing and 
in what timescale  
• If the Equality Act 2010 is likely to apply  • Suggestion of reasonable adjustments which may support the 
employee to return to work/maintain attendance at work  
 
11.4.  Occupational health reports enable manage rs to make informed 
decisions when  managing an employee’s attendance within the 
terms of this policy.  Any decision relating to the employee is the 
responsibility of Management and not the Occupational Health 
Provider.  
 
11.5.  The outcome report following an Occupational Health consultation 
should be discussed with the employee and a copy of the report 
provided to the employe e by their line manager.  
 
Musculoskeletal Interventions  
 
11.6.  Where an employee is suffering from an untreated musculoskeletal 
condition which is impacting upon attendance or performance at 
work, a musculoskeletal referral to occupational health will be made 
to provide advice to the employee and manager.  
 
11.7.  The occupational health provider will triage the referral and identify 
an appropriate course of course of action which may include 
telephone and/or face to face consultation.  Where appropriate 
employees will be advised of exercises to improve their condit ion 
and in some instances treatment by means of physical manipulation 
will be provided.  
 
11.8.  The outcome report following an Occupational Health consultation 
should be discussed with the employee and a copy of the report 
provided to the employee  by their line manager.  
 
Note : Musculoskeletal referrals often result in provision of advice from a 
physiotherapist over the telephone and do not require “hands -on” 
manipulation.  The occupational health provider will decide upon the 
appropriate method of delivery of advice and treatm ent. 
OFFICIAL  
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL  
6 
Version 2.0        February 2025  
                                    Phased Return to Work  
 
12.1.  Glasgow City Council recognises that returning to work following a 
long term absence can be physically and mentally challenging and 
that an employee may require additional support at this time.  
 
12.2.  In order to support a return to work  from a long -term absence , 
management may, in consultation with the employee, consider a 
paid phased return to work  of up to four weeks . 
 
12.3.  A phased return may be recommended  by management, 
occupational health, the employee or their GP.  
 
12.4.  Managers will consider a number of factors determining the 
appropriateness of a phased return to work plan; the operational 
needs of the service, the nature of the employee's role, the 
employee's current state of health,  the length of absence,  advice 
from occupational health, advice from the employee’s GP and the 
employee's engagement with the attendance management process.  
 
12.5.  Throughout the phased return  arrangements, such as progression 
such as a gradual build of working days , the manager will monitor 
progress towards a full return to work and discuss progress with the 
employee prior to resuming full duties.  
 
Sickness or Disablement due to 
Accident in the Course of 
Employment  
 
13.1 Where an employee is absent due to sickness or disablement as a 
result of a workplace incident  arising out of and in the course of 
employment, or due to industrial disease, the employee shall be entitled to a separate allowance calculated on the same basis as the 
sickness allowance.  
 
13.2 The allowance in respect of normal sickness and that of absence 
due to a workplace accident or disease are entirely separate.  
Periods of absence in respect of one shall not count against the 
allowance for the other.  
 
13.3 An absence due to a workplace accident shall only be accepted and 
qualify for payment when an entry in BI/510 (Accident Book, 
approved for the purposes of the Social Security Act 1975 as 
amended) is appropriate and has been completed, and in the 
subsequent investigation by the Council the facts so recorded are 
found to be accurate a nd there has been no negligence on the part 
of the employee in terms of that individual complying with the 
recognised safe methods of work.  
 
13.4 In determining what if any action should be taken where an 
employee’s overall absence record includes period(s) of accepted 
industrial injury, Managers/Supervisors must carefully evaluate the 
reasons for absence when assessing the record, and must take ful l 
account of accepted industrial injuries when dealing with employees 
under the terms of this policy.  
 
13.5 Wherein applying this procedure a Manager/Supervisor identifies an 
employee who regularly sustains industrial injuries additional 
training and or advice may be required.  The Council’s Health and 
Safety Officers will be available to assist Managers.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
OFFICIAL  
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL  
7 
Version 2.0        February 2025  
                                    Sickness Absence Categories  
 
14.1 For the purposes of managing attendance this policy identifies two 
categories of sickness absence:  
 
• Short Term Intermittent Absence : any spell of absence of 
up to and including 19 working days.  (pro -rated for non -
standard working patterns)  
• Long Term Absence : any single spell of absence of 20 or 
more working days.  (pro -rated for non -standard working 
patterns)  
 
14.2 When managing either category of absence managers will be 
mindful of the requirements of the Equality Act 2010 which makes 
specific provisions to prevent discrimination against any employee 
on the grounds of a protected characteristic.  Of particular relevance 
to attendance management is “disability”.  The Equality Act 2010 
identifies a person as disabled if they h ave ‘a physical or mental 
impairment’ which has ‘a substantial and long -term adverse effect’ 
on their ‘ability to carry out normal day -to-day activities’:  
 
• Impairment  - may be a physical or mental impairment, or 
both.  
• Long -term  - lasting at least a year, or likely to be for the rest 
of the person’s life or recur . 
• Substantial adverse effect  - more than minor, but it may 
fluctuate or change, and may not be present all the time . 
• Normal day -to-day activities  - not defined by the Act, but 
includes things people do in their own time, and are still able 
to fully participate in their working life.  
 
14.3 Additional information regarding the Equality Act and protected 
characteristics may be found in the Equalities Library .  
 Managing disability related sickness absence can be complex and 
managers should consult with their Service Strategic HR  team in 
relation to such situations.  
 
Managing Short Term Intermittent 
Sickness Absence  
 
15.1 Short Term Intermittent Sickness Absence will generally be 
managed via the Attendance Review  as required in Paragraph 7.  
 
15.2 Where an employee regularly meets the review threshold  defined in 
Paragraph 7, management will utili se the facilities described in 
Paragraph 8 to support the employee to maintain an acceptable 
level of attendance.  
 
15.3 Where management interventions and support do not result in an 
employee maintaining an acceptable level of attendance, the 
employee's attendance record will be reviewed and considered as a 
capability issue (see Paragraph 19 Capability Considerations)  
 
Managing Long Term Absence    
16.1 Where an employee is absent due to long term sickness absence, 
management will meet with the employee typically every 4 -6 weeks  
throughout the period of absence.  The frequency of meetings will 
be dependent upon the circumstances of the specific absence and 
will give due consideration to the health of the employee, their 
treatment plan, prognosis and return to work plans.  
 
16.2 Regular meetings are an important part of managing long term 
sickness absence as they provide an opportunity to maintain the 
relationship between the employee and the manager, allow the 
employee to provide updates on their health and their thoughts 
OFFICIAL  
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL  
8 
Version 2.0        February 2025  
                                    about a future return to work, allow the manager to update the 
employee on relevant workplace situations and to discuss any 
management decisions relating to the absence.  
 
16.3 Meetings will normally take place at the employee’s usual place of 
work , at alternative council premises , or via Microsoft Teams . In 
some circumstances it may be appropriate to meet at an alternative 
and mutually agreed location. The location should be appropriate to 
facilitate discussion about health and workplace matters privately.  
 
16.4 Throughout the long term sickness absence, management will 
utilise the facilities described in Paragraphs 8 to 1 2, as appropriate 
to the situation, with a view to gaining medical advice on the 
employee’s condition and support the employee’s recovery to 
facilitate a return to work.  
 
16.5 On return to work following a long term absence, the return t o work 
discussion described in P aragraph 6 will be carried out and a n 
attendance review as described in paragraph 7 will be arranged.  
 
16.6 Where an absence extends beyond a 13 week period , leave 
entitlement should be recalculated in accordance with Conditions of 
Service: Leave.  
 
16.7 Where an employee is unable to return to work due to ill health,  the 
Capability considerations in Paragraph 19 will be initiated.  
 
Managing Com binations of absence 
categories  
 
17.1 An employee’s sickness absence record may comprise of a 
combination of short and long term absence.  In such 
circumstances, each individual absence will be managed as 
described in Paragraphs 1 5 and 1 6.  
17.2 In such cases, management will review the employee’s attendance 
record and where satisfied that the overall record is unacceptable 
the Capability consideration in Paragraph 19 will be initiated.  
 
Managing Terminal Illness  
 
18.1   Employees diagnosed with a termin al illness will be managed in a 
dignified and compassionate manner.  Glasgow City Council have 
adopted the Trade Union Congress’ “Dying to Work Charter” and 
will not dismiss any person with a terminal diagn osis because of 
their condition, unless in the employee’s best interests.  
 
 
18.2   In appropriate cases, line managers should contact their  Service  
Strategic HR  team . 
 
Capability Considerations  
 
19.1 Where a return to work or a n acceptable level of attendance cannot 
be achieved , this  could result in a decision being taken about 
whether the employee’s services can be retained or whether there is 
no alternative but to release them from the service ’s employment, 
which includes terminating their contract on the grounds of lack of 
capability, this would not be  considered unless all options had been 
exhausted first.  
 
19.2 This may arise due to:  
• regular spells of short term intermittent sickness absence or  
• A spell , or spells  of long term absence or  
• A combination of short and long term absences.  
• Specific patterns of absences.  
 
OFFICIAL  
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL  
9 
Version 2.0        February 2025  
                                    19.3 As each employee’s health, duration of absence, spells of absence 
and capacity to undertake duties will be unique to their 
circumstances there is no single threshold  for capability 
considerations.  
 
19.4 The employee must be formally advised of the concern regarding 
their attendance and that their continued employment is at risk.  All 
relevant available options to support the employee improve and  
sustain  an acceptable level of attendance should be fully explored, 
including:  
• Additional training/retraining  
• Advice from occupational health  
• Allow reasonable time off during working hours for 
rehabilitation/treatment  
• Alternative/restricted duties  
• Flexible working/part time working  
• Phased return to work  
• Redeployment  
• Redesign of duties  
Note : This list is not exhaustive  
19.5 Where reasonable options have been explored and assessed, are 
not viable and an employee is unable to provide an acceptable level 
of attendance, management may consider termination of 
employment on the grounds of capability.  
19.6 Where appropriate, if an employee is a member of the Local 
Government Pension scheme, management will establish if the 
employee will meet the criteria for ill health retiral prior to any 
decision to terminate employment on the grounds of capability.  
19.7 In all cases, before taking a decision to dismiss on the grounds of 
capability the following points must be fully addressed:  
• Has full consideration been given to the reasons why 
employment cannot be sustained?  • Has the employee been fully consulted about their health and 
ability to give regular and effective attendance?  
• Has up to date medical advice been sought and considered?  
• Taking into account the employee’s length of service, have 
enough support been provided that would allow them to return 
to work?  
 
Note : Managers must consult with their Service Strategic HR Team before 
taking any decision to dismiss on the grounds of capability.  
 
19.8 Employees have the right to appeal against dismissal on the 
grounds of capability in accordance with the Appeals procedure 
detailed in the Conditions of Service: Discipline & Appeals 
Procedure.  
 
Disciplinary Considerations  
 
20.1 Disciplinary action may be considered if there are breaches of 
conduct at any stage of the attendance management process 
(including the return to work process) in accordance with the 
Council’s Discipline and Appeals Procedure such as : 
 
• unauthorised absence,  
• a failure to comply with absence reporting procedures , 
• an abuse of the sick pay provisions , 
• fraudulent conduct  
 
Note:  In the application and interpretation of this policy further detailed 
guidance is provided for Managers/Supervisors within the Supporting 
Attendance  Toolkit.  Advice and guidance on the application of these 
procedures is also available from Service Strategic HR teams.   
