
DLP Digital Improvement Project Charter

Name(s)


What dimensions of Quality does this project best align with? (you can tick more than one)
(tick)
Dimensions of Quality:

Efficient

Safe

Equitable

Effective

Person-centred

Timely

Sustainable
What are you trying to accomplish (Your aim statement)? 
This is your improvement project in a ‘nut-shell’: a single sentence that states what you intend to accomplish. Outline how much improvement is to be achieved, when you expect to achieve this by and with who/where. 

Be realistic here. Your aspirations should be balanced by some idea of how you can get there (your initial ideas for change which will be listed below).

Why is this important (the rationale and business case for your improvement project)?
What problem will the work address and what is the impact of doing nothing? 
How do you know this is a problem and what is your starting position? 
How big a gap is there between where you are and where you want to be? 
How does your aim fit into the strategic vision of your organisation? 
What is the expected outcome for people (where the “people” are the focus of the improvement work)?
What will the impact be on resources (think of the environment, finances, people)?
Why do you believe the timescale you have set is realistic? 




What is the scope of your project?
Who, specifically, will be affected by the success or failure of this project (service users, staff, patients, community, etc)?  
How many people/how large an area is included in your project?
Are there any processes/areas of work associated with the problem that won’t be included in your project?


How will you know that a change is an improvement?
What measures will you use to help you monitor progress toward your goal? These should include:
Outcome - how you will track the progress of your improvement aim
Process - how you will know how the parts of the system you are trying to change (to get you to your improvement aim) are performing and the impact of your changes on these.
Balancing – areas you need to keep watch in case your action has an unintended impact on sustainability (e.g. increased use of environmental, financial or social related resources), impact on other parts of the system or to see if something unrelated to your project is influencing project success.







What changes can you make that will lead to improvement?
Do you have some initial ideas that your team can test to move toward your goal? What can you change about how your processes and system currently operate to make things better? Tasks and activities are different to change ideas and should not be included here. They are included in the next section.
Is there evidence about what works?
What are the subject experts telling you?
Have you conducted any ‘as is’ analysis, e.g cause and effect, process mapping that has generated change ideas?












What initial activities do you have planned?
These are the tasks associated with your project (not to be confused with change ideas) e.g. setting up an improvement team, gathering baseline data, and applying improvement tools to help you understand how things are currently working to help identify change ideas










Participation (Team membership) and Leadership support
Who is in your improvement team? People to consider:
subject matter expert
process owners who can make changes
representatives of those impacted by your project: families, service users, young people, patients, customers etc
finance representative, if needed
a sponsor with links to executive level for leadership support, i.e. your digital lead








What may risk the success of your project?
List any risks associated with your project and any action you have planned to monitor or manage these.








Comments/Feedback from Digital Lead
Use this space to note comments or feedback from your digital lead. 


Please note that NES are unable to provide feedback for each individual project. You should discuss your project charter with your digital lead (whomever supported your application at organisational level) or appropriate person for guidance and feedback. If you have questions or concerns, please contact us at HYPERLINK "mailto:nes.dlp@nhs.scot"nes.dlp@nhs.scot.
Please submit your project charter by email to HYPERLINK "mailto:nes.dlp@nhs.scot"nes.dlp@nhs.scot 
This should be treated as a working document. It is acceptable to add to or amend your charter following submission. 











Adapted from Scottish Improvement Leaders (ScIL) Programme November



