OFFICIAL  
                                              
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
Manager’s Information Sheet: Reasonable Adjustments  
OFFICIAL  
Corporate Human Resources   1   
Version 3.0     
February 2025   
 
Introduction  
 
We’ve developed this information sheet to outline the types of reasonable adjustments that may 
be considered to:  
 
• help an employee with an underlying health problem to achieve an acceptable level of 
attendance; or  
• to aid an employee who is long term absent to return to work.  
 
You should fully explore all types of reasonable adjustments to assess whether they may be 
appropriate, considering any advice provided by the employee’s GP in the statement of fitness 
for work , or from our occupational health service  (OHS).  You should also ensure you confirm 
these discussions in writing to the employee. You’ll also need to confirm any temporary 
arrangements in writing, ensuring that they are reviewed on a regular basis, with specific agreed 
timescales built in.  
 
You may consider some of the actions listed below.  
 
Flexible working hours  
 
You should consider this option where:  
 
• the employee has indicated that they’re fit to return to work, but aren’t able to return to full 
time hours, or  
• their doctor has suggested altered hours.  
 
You could let the employee work flexibly on a temporary basis to help with their initial return to 
work, particularly where there’s medical evidence to suggest that this will assist a full recovery. 
You should make sure that the employee’s pay is changed t o reflect the actual hours worked. You 
should discuss and agree timescales for this, seeking guidance from your service HR team.  
 
You should also consider requests from employees who want to work flexibly on a permanent 
basis. You can find further information on this in our work life balance policy  and flexible 
working procedure . 
 
Redesign the job and/or  give some duties to another employee  
 
This involves giving some of the employee’s duties to another employee either on a short term or 
longer term/permanent basis. You should consult with the employee’s colleagues in an 
appropriate and sensitive manner, making sure that they understand why the  changes are 
needed. This also allows them to give the employee the appropriate support, where required.  
 
 
 
OFFICIAL  
                                              
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
Manager’s Information Sheet: Reasonable Adjustments  
OFFICIAL  
Corporate Human Resources   2   
Version 3.0     
February 2025   
 
Phased return to work  
 
A phased return involves allowing the employee to come back to work gradually. This can help 
them to:  
 
• settle back in following a period of long term absence; and  
• feel supported when they return to work.  
 
You may decide that this option is appropriate based on your discussions with the employee, or it 
may be that it’s been recommended by OHS or the employee’s doctor.  
 
The employee’s hours and days should increase on a phased basis, until they’re back to their 
normal working pattern. Both you and the employee should agree the return to work pattern, 
normally before they’re due back at work. The timescale for a paid phase d return will vary 
depending on the circumstances, but should normally take place over the course of no more than 
four weeks.  
 
You should consult with your service HR team in assessing and implementing a phased return for 
your employee, taking the following factors into consideration:  
 
• operational needs of the Service  
• nature of the employee’s role  
• employee’s current state of health  
• advice from OHS (occupational health service)  
• advice from the employee’s GP  
• employee’s engagement with the attendance management process.  
 
Lighter duties  
 
You should consider giving the employee lighter duties where their doctor or OHS has indicated 
that their medical condition prevents them from carrying out their full duties.  
 
You should seek advice from OHS and your service HR team in making these arrangements, 
taking into account the needs of the service.  
 
Lighter duties may be on a permanent or temporary basis and should be confirmed in writing, 
including timescales. You should review any temporary arrangements on a regular basis until the 
employee is able to return to their full range of duties.  
 
Alternative work/Redeployment  
 
You should explore alternative work for the employee, where appropriate. This may be in cases 
where they’re unable to carry out their current job due to their health, or their duties will make their 
condition worse, even with reasonable adjustments.  You s hould normally seek guidance from 
OHS in such cases.  
OFFICIAL  
                                              
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
Manager’s Information Sheet: Reasonable Adjustments  
OFFICIAL  
Corporate Human Resources   3   
Version 3.0     
February 2025   
 
You should also seek guidance from OHS to assess what alternative work may be suitable. You 
should discuss this with the employee, and establish what skills they have and what type of work 
they’re able to do.  
 
You should then look to see if there are any vacancies available across the Council that may be 
appropriate, seeking advice from your service HR team and utilising the Redeployment 
guidance and information  available.  
 
Additional training and/or retraining  
 
This may be appropriate where:  
 
• The employee is given alternative duties.  
• The employee has to change the methods they use to carry out their job.  
• The employee has been absent from work for a lengthy period of time and needs to 
familiarise themselves with their duties.  
• The employee’s duties have changed or developed in their absence.  
 
Further guidance  
 
It may be that one or more of the options listed are appropriate. This list is not exhaustive and you 
may need to look at other measures to make sure that you have considered all reasonable 
adjustments. You should contact your service HR team for advice an d guidance in such cases.  
 
 
 
