OFFICIAL
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL
1 
Version 4.0     February 2025  
Supporting Attendance - Manager’ s Guide  
OFFICIAL
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL
2 
Version 4.0     February 2025  1. INTRODUCTION
Our policy
Purpose of the guide
2. WHY MANAGE ATTENDANCE?
3. YOUR ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITIES
4. SUPPORTING EMPLOYEE S
WELLBEING
EAP Services
Referrals
Able Futures
Access to Work
Occupational Health
5. ABSENCE  REPORTING
Reporting absent
Continu ing sickness absence
Sick pay
Return to work discussion
6. MANAGING ATTENDANCE
Absence categories and Equality Act considerations
Wellbeing Support Meeting
Managing short term intermittent absence
Attendance Review
Managing l ong term absence
Long Term Absence Meeting7. FACILITATING A RETURN TO WORK
Management actions
Types of Supports and R easonable adjustments
Redeployment
Unpaid leave of absence
8. RETURN TO WORK
CONSIDERATIONS
When the employee is able to return to work
Disciplinary considerations
9. CAPABILITY  AND ILL HEALTH
RETIRAL  CONSIDERATIONS
When the employee is unable to return to work or
sustain an acceptable level of attendance
Ill health retiral
Capability dismissal
10. FURTHER GUIDANCE /LINKS
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
3 
Version 4.0     February 2025  EMPLOYMENT ZONE 
1. Introduction
Our policy 
Every day, our employees act as the ‘face’ of Glasgow City Council, often 
coming into contact with the people who liv e in and visit the City. Our 
reputation and success depends on the services we deliv er. As a result, 
we expec t a high level of attendance fro m employees in order to deliver an 
efficien t and effective service to all our customers.     
We recognise the importance of the health, safety and wellbeing o f all 
employees . Our supporting attendance policy provides a framework which 
allows us to support employees’ attendanc e, and to provide assistance to 
employees with health problems at an early stage. We’re committed to 
supporting employee attendanc e and improving employee health and 
wellbeing. This is demonstrate d by the profes sional services we have 
available, such as our employee assistance programme  and 
occupational health service.  
As an introduction to managing attendanc e, you should undertake the 
relevant e-learning course ‘Maximizing Attend ance – Effective 
Communication’ to ensure that employees are managed in line with 
Council policy and procedures.  
Purpose of the guide 
The purpose of this guide is to outline your responsibilities as a manager 
under our policy, and to take you through the processes you’ll need to 
follow if an employee reports absent due to sickness. It also outlines the 
suppor t you should consider, and the options you can use in helping the 
employee to return to work at the earliest stage and the steps that you’ll 
need to take in helping employees to maintai n hig h levels of attendance at 
work. 
You’ll also find details of what you , as a line manager, should do where an 
employee’s attendanc e is giving cause for conc ern and has reached an unsustainable level or where an employee is unable to return to work, and 
the process you’ll need to follow.  
2.Why Manage Attendance
Sickness Absence is one of the council’s Statutory Performance Indicators 
and is used for benchmarking and performance review.  High levels of 
sickness absence are costly and if you don’t manage attendance properly, 
it could :  
•Have a detrimental impact on the level of se rvice and support that
we provide to citizens who rely on Council services.
•Impact on service delivery and reputation of the Council.
•Cause additional staff pressures affecting morale and levels of
stress, impacting on staff engagement levels.
•Cause a lack of interest or concern among people who have a
pattern of short term intermittent absences. They may think that
it’s acceptable to be absent from work no matter the
circumstances.
•Lead to employees who are long term absent feeling cut off and
out of touch.
It’s very important that all line managers  take an active role in managing 
attendance and in supporting employees to maintain regular attendance. 
This allows managers to : 
•Support employees with health problems at an early stage.
•Create a culture of wellbeing for employees across the Council.
•Respond well to problems with service delivery that could or do
happen.
•Reduce the impact on service delivery and colleagues who
continue to provide support to service users who continue to rely
on Council services.
Adopting a proactive approach to managing attendance and supporting 
staff who may experience ill health, will require managers and staff to have 
OFFICIAL
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL
4 
Version 4.0     February 2025  open and honest discussions about any health conditions impacting on 
their ability to perform their duties.  This will help to identify any 
adjustments that could be put in place to support staff.  
•Ensuring discussions take place with staff at an early stage is very
important and will help to deliver benefits of  improved employee
health and wellbeing.
•Providing the right help and support.
•Increased productivity.
•Reduced costs.
•Ability to plan and manage workloads and how we deliver the
service.
•Improved customer service and satisfaction.
3.Your Role and Responsibilities
As a manager, y ou have a key role to play in monitoring and managing 
employees’ attendance. You should:  
•Be proactive in managing the health and wellbeing of your team,
establishing a positive working environment where employees can
raise concerns at an early stage.  This includes the legal duty of
care to protect employees from risks of ill health/injury at work.
•Communicate council and service attendance targets to
employees and the impact of poor attendance .
•Regularly review attendance levels within your section or team .
•Treat employees fairly and consistently .
•Encourage them to seek help at an early stage if they have any
issues that may affect their health or ability to attend work. For
example, promotion of Employer Assistance Provider  (EAP)
services or consideration of an  Occupational Health referral.
You should adopt  a robust approach, when managing an employee’s 
attendance. However,  in line with  our policy , you are required to take 
management action in the following circumstances:   •Has unauthorised absence .
•Fails to comply with absence reporting procedures .
•Abuses the council’s sick pay provisions .
•Demonstrates fraudulent conduct.
•Has an unacceptable and unsustainable attendance record.
When managing a ttendance , you should:  
•Make sure that employees are aware of and follow the correct 
procedures for reporting absence, and the forms they’ll need to 
submit, such as a fit note.
•Discuss any periods of absence with employees, carrying out 
return to work discussions and Attendance Reviews as required.
•Encourage employees to seek appropriate help at an early stage if  
they have any issues that may impact on their health or ability to 
attend work.
•Be aware of and where appropriate, promote and utilise the wide 
range of support services in place to assist employees.
•Consider other leave arrangements that may be appropriate such 
as Bereavement Leave, or Dependents Leave. Please refer to the 
Leave Conditions of Service .
•Consider reasonable adjustments (temporary or permanent) to 
support employees in the workplace.
•Advise employees of your concerns about their level of attendance  
and if appropriate, outline the potential consequences of this.
•Arrange a referral to our occupational health provider as 
appropriate.
•Provide written outcome of the discussions, and any action points 
to the employee.
You should also be mindful of any other consequences of absence 
and take appropriate steps to address those issues . Consequences of 
absences include : 
•demotivated colleagues who have to take on extra
responsibilities
•disruption to productivity and the services we deliver
OFFICIAL
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL
5 
Version 4.0     February 2025  •reduce customer satisfaction.
4. Supporting Employees Wellbeing
We are committed to the health and wellbeing o f our staff wi th our 
supporting attendance policy and partnership arrangements in the form of 
Occupational Health, Employee Assistanc e Programm e, Access to 
Work/Able Futures, See Me a t Work Programme an d Healthy Working 
Lives framework.  
Whilst we recognise some periods of absenc e due to sickness are 
inevitabl e, we believ e the promotion of targeted initiatives and events 
together with our established partnership work ing arrangements, will better 
support employees to manage their own health and wellbeing.  As a 
manager, you should promote all available resources and events as 
advertised on the health, wellbeing, equality and diversity training and  
events training pages.  
The Council’s Staff Health an d Wellbeing Handbook brings together a 
wide range of recommended internal and external health and wellbeing 
information, guidance and support - all in the one place for ease of 
reference.  To find out more, please visit here. 
EAP Services 
Our 24/7 confidential employee assistanc e provider, PA M Assis t on 0800 
247 110 0 delivers a free and confidential life management and personal 
support servic e, across areas such as: 
•Legal matters , such as consumer rights, property,
landlord/tenant, family and motoring law
•Money matters , including managing creditors, budgeting and debt
management plans
•Health and wellbeing  information on lifestyle issues such as diet,
exercise, sleep, health, and medical concerns
Support is available to all staff and a vailable supports include:  •One off support calls
•Face to face/video/telephone or e -counselling
•6 sessions structured counselling
•Legal and debt support
•Online and app based wellbeing tools
•Wellness dashboard
•Live Chat on new portal
Services offered by PAM Assist are  confidential.  They adhere to the 
strictest standards of data protection, and counsellors are bound by BACP 
guidelines to protect confidentiality.  
Contact details  
PAM Assist:  
Telephone (counselling, information  
and Guidance for Managers):  0800 247 1100  
Email:  info@pamwellbeing.co.uk  or counsellingteam@pamassist.co.uk  
Online:  PAM Assist (pam -assist.co.uk)  
Click on member login and enter:  
• Username : GCC
• Password : employee
How can EAP help you as a Manager?  
As well as being available to all employees to utilise, PAM Assist provide 
dedicated resources for supporting managers, supervisors, and team 
leaders to effectively address issues impacting the wellbeing of their staff. 
The PAM Assist team provide a confidential source of guidance and 
information to help you:   
•Provide encouragement and support to your employees during
difficult situations .
OFFICIAL
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL
6 
Version 4.0     February 2025  •Develop a plan to deal with employee performance
/conduct/attendance issues .
•Save valuable time by providing solutions to a wide array of
employee issues .
•Support personal issues that interfere with workplace functioning
and productivity .
•Develop your skills as a line manager .
Click  here  to find out more information that you should know about using 
the PAM Assist employee assistance service as a management resource.  
Referrals 
You should remind employees of the services available through our EAP, 
particularly in cases where they’re experiencing psychological problems 
such as stress, depression, or anxiety, or problems of a personal nature.  
There are three types of referral:  
•Self-referral  – this is where the employee makes contact, and is
the preferred option.
•Management referral  – you can contact the employee assistance
provider on the employee’s behalf, with their consent.
•Disciplinary referral  – this is where the employee is referred to
employee assistance as part of the disciplinary process. This
could be in cases where the employee is experiencing problems
with alcohol, for example. You can find more information on this in
our Alcohol and drug support policy.
Able Futures  
Long term mental health support for staff  
Able Futures provides access to free, confidential work -focussed support 
from a qualified mental health professional – the Access to Work mental 
health support service.    It provides: 
•Nine months personalised advice and guidance and regular
appointments with a mental health professional
•A plan to support your mental health by making adjustments,
developing coping strategies and learning ways to look after your
wellbeing
•Confidential, no cost support with no waiting list and no need for a
mental health diagnosis - you can refer yourself and get help with
whatever is on your mind.
Contact details 
Able Futures : 
Telephone No: 0800 321 3137  
Website: www.able -futures.co.uk  
Access to work 
If your employee has a disability, they may find practical obstacles that 
stop them from making the most of opportunities at work. Access to Work 
(ATW) is a Government grant -funded programme.  If an employee’s health 
or disability affects the way they do t heir job and is likely to last for at least 
12 months then they may be able to receive help from ATW.  
ATW might contribute towards the cost of any equipment needed at work, 
or adapting premises to meet their needs. It can also help pay towards the 
cost of getting to work if they can’t use public transport. You can find more 
information on the Government’s Access to Work website  here. 
Occupational health 
Our occupational health service is in place to help us promote and 
maintain the health, safety and wellbeing of all our employees.   The 
service is provided independently by People Asset Management (PAM) 
who are equipped with a team of occupational health p rofessionals to 
OFFICIAL
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL
7 
Version 4.0     February 2025  provide specialist advice and support to managers and HR to help them 
effectively manage health matters at work such as:  
•Determining fitness to work.
•Supporting  employees with health problems.
•Assisting employees returning to work after illness or injury.
•Identifying and  managing work related health risks/surveillance
and hazards.
Assessing when to make a referral  
A referral to occupational health should be considered if there are 
concerns that an employee's work may be having a negative impact on 
their health, or that their health may be affecting their performance or 
attendance at work. Referrals should always be viewed positively as a 
means of sourcing practical advice, guidance and support in addressing 
any employee health issues at work. These are made via the Council’s OH 
portal – OHIO. If you are a referring manager, and do not have access to 
OHIO, you should contact your Service Strategic HR team . 
You should gather as much information as possible from the employee 
before making a referral to the occupational health service (OHS) about:  
•The nature of their illness or disability.
•How long the absence is likely to last.
•Whether they’re likely to make a full recovery and, if not, what
work they’re able to do , job and working conditions.
•Sickness absence history.
In some circumstances, the prognosis of the long term absence may mean 
that a referral isn’t necessary in the early stages. For example employee 
tells you about their treatment plan and that they’re due to attend a 
hospital consultation the following month.  You may find it of more benefit 
to make the referral after the hospital appointment in such cases, as it will 
allow you to get more up  to date information about their condition.  You may not need to refer the employee to OHS where they indicate that 
they’ll be fit to return to work within a particular period of time. However, 
where an absence reaches a duration of 8-12 weeks, with no expected 
date of return, a referral should be considered. 
You could also consider a referral where the employee wants to return to 
work before the end date given in their stateme nt of fitness for work . 
However, you shoul d only do so in exceptional cases where you feel that 
you need a medical opinion to confirm th at the employee is fit to return. 
OHS advice line – 0141 428 3900 
Our OHS provider operates an advice line where you can get general 
medical guidance from an occupational health practitioner about employee 
health issues. You can contact th e advic e line for guidance if you’re 
unsure whether a referral is necessary. You can find more information, 
including contact details, in supporting attendance: ohs guide for  
managers. 
Making a referral 
You should refer an employee to occupational health to: 
•clarify when they’ll be able to return to work; and
•establish what duties they can carry out.
You may also find a referral beneficial in cases where the employee 
doesn’t agree with the reasonabl e adjustments suggested by their doctor 
in their statemen t of fitness for work . 
You should tell the employee that you’re referring them to the OHS and 
the reasons why before making the referral. The referral process is 
explained in further detail in Supporting attendance: making referrals 
using OHIO.   
You should provide details to OHS abo ut the employee’s: 
•The nature of their illness or disability.
OFFICIAL
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL
8 
Version 4.0     February 2025  •How long the absence is likely to last.
•Whether they’re likely to make a full recovery and, if not, what
work they’re able to do.
•job and working conditions; and
•sickness absence history.
You should make s ure that the information you provide is accurate an d up 
to date, as the employee is able t o access this form. 
You should ask relevant questions to ensure th at you get the information 
you requir e.  You may also want to ask specific questions that will help you 
to assess the employee’s disability status under the Equality Act 2010, 
where appropriate. You can find further details on the Act and what it 
means in supporting attendance: manager’s guide to disability,  
mental health problems and stress.  
Appointments may be conducted by telephon e or fac e to fac e, as clinically 
appropriate. 
The consultation appointment 
The employee will be required to take part in the consultation process, 
either by telephone or fac e to fac e and discuss their health situation with a 
nurse or doctor. The employee may be charged a fee if they don’t attend 
the appointme nt or are late, depending on the circumstances.   
Third party medic al reports 
Occasionally, there may be a need to obtain up to date medical 
information from an employee’s GP and /or hospital specialist for an 
employee who i sn’t well enough to take part in the appointment process or 
in cases, where the OH Adviser or Physician require additional 
information.   
For an employee unable to take p art in the appointment process, you 
should arrange to make a medical report request vi a OHS.  Employee 
consen t is required to this information being release d and OHS will arrange to send a consent form to employees, in accordance with General 
Medical Council guidelines .  
The report  
You will receive a report from OHS once the employee has undertaken the 
consultation. This will contain information about the employee’s condition, 
as well as answers to any questions you have asked. You should provide 
a copy of the report to the employee.  
You should arrange to meet with the employee to review the information 
contained in the report and to discuss its contents. You should agree any 
relevant actions or supports identified within the report.  
OHS review referrals  
You may need to refer the employee to OHS more than once during their 
absence in order to get the most up to date medical information on their 
condition. You should arrange to meet with the employee after each 
consultation to discuss the content of the rep ort. A further referral to OHS 
may be appropriate in cases where, for example, the employee has not 
returned to work during the time indicated by OHS in an earlier report.  
5.Absence Reporting
Reporting absen t 
If an employee is ill and can’t attend work, they must contact you as soon 
as possible on the first day. The latest time they can do this will depend on 
local arrangements operating within your Service, which you will have 
communicated to all staff.  
The employee must contact you directly  by telephone  to report absent. If 
you’re not available, they should leave a message and provide contact 
details for you to call them back.   
OFFICIAL
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL
9 
Version 4.0     February 2025  Only i n exceptional circumstances, such as hospital admission, a family 
member or friend may make contact on the employee’s behalf.  
Where you have been unavailable to take a call from an employee, you 
should make a return call at the earliest opportunity, where the employee 
has:  
•left a message with a colleague;
•left a recorded message on an answer phone; or
•sent an e-mail or text message .
Questions you should ask  
You’ll need to establish the current situation from the employee when they 
report sick .  The following questions  should  be asked in order to establish 
the nature and reason for their absence and any issues you need to be 
aware of while they’re off.  
•What is the reason for the absence and expected duration of the 
absence?
•Has any medical advice been sought?
•Is there anything you can do to help?
•Are there any workplace issues contributing to their absence?
•Are there any outstanding work items, such as tasks or upcoming  
meetings, that require to be completed,?
•What is their expected return date if known?
•Are further supports required such as Employee Assistance 
Provider (EAP)?
You should ask if there’s anything else that they need to make you aware 
of and confirm when they should next make contact.  You should also 
consider if a wellbeing support meeting  is appropriate , for absences due to 
a musculoskeletal or psychological condition.  In this is the case, you 
should meet with them at a very early stage, usually within the first week of 
absence, to  establish what forms of support can be offered to assist their 
recovery.  Further details can be  found in section 6. Continu ing sickness absence 
Maintaining contact  
If the employee’s absence from work continues, they should contact you 
on the 4th day and again on the 7th day of their absence , or the next 
available working day . These are based on calendar days and not 
workdays . Local arrangements for reporting  such as phoning within the 
first hour of their shift,  should be made clear to the employee and may also 
be in place for non -standard working patterns.  
Where their absence continues beyond a calendar week, they must 
contact you every 7 days. They’ll also need to submit a statement of 
fitness for work from their doctor for any absence that lasts for more than 7 
days. The employee must maintain contact with  you during their absence 
and submit medical statements on time. If they don’t do this, their absence 
may be considered unauthorised  and may result in their Occupational Sick 
Pay entitlement being suspended .  
In your role as a line manager, you have a duty of care towards your 
employees. Therefore, you should take all reasonable management steps 
to ensure there are no safety or welfare issues resulting in their non -
contact. These include, but are not limited to :  
•Attempt to make contact by telephone with the employee.
•Contact the employee’s next of kin .
•Visit the employee’s home.
However, in some circumstances, an employee may have a condition that 
you know will result in an extended period of absence. You should discuss 
and agree appropriate contact arrangements in such case s. 
OFFICIAL
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL
10 
Version 4.0     February 2025  We’ve summarised this process , as follows:  
Self-Certification 
Where an absence is less than 7 calendar days, an employee should 
complete a sickness absence certificate (also known as ‘self-certification'). 
This should be completed by the employee as part of the return t o work 
discussions and would remai n in their employee file.  
The statement of fitness for work 
The employee needs to submit a copy of statement of fitness for work 
(or ‘fit note’ as it’s commonly known) after the 7th calendar day of absence. 
This form allows a GP or authorised healthc are professional to advise 
whether an employee is not fit for work, or if they may be fit for work. 
•Not fit for work  – It has been assessed that they have a health
condition that prevents them from working for a stated period of
time.
•May be fit for work  - It has  been assessed that they have a
condition that doesn’t necessarily stop them from returning to
work. In other words, they could return to work but may not be
able to do all of their normal duties.If the employee may be fit for work, it will  have been noted on the 
statement of fitness for work whether the employee would benefit from:  
•a phased return to work .
•altered hours .
•amended duties .
•workplace adaptations.
The GP or authorised healthcare professional will also:  
•Provide written comments on the form offering a more detailed
view of the kind of things that may help (for example, how your
employee’s condition will affect what they do and some of the
things that could help your employee return to work).
•State the period of time that the advice is valid for.
The statement of fitness for work will state the period of time that the 
advice is for. You should discuss this with the employee and be clear 
about the length of time any amended duties or support will be in place for. 
This will be a temporary measure in most cases. You should meet with the 
employee while they’re doing the adjusted duties to review and assess 
how it’s working.  
The medical statement doesn’t include the option for the GP or authorised 
healthcare professional to advise that the employee is fully fit for work. 
This means that an employee  is expected to return to work following 
expiration of their fit note.   
However, i f an employee wants to return to work and you agree that this is 
appropriate, then you don’t need to wait until the end of the statement 
period for them to do so.  
Alternatively, if you don’t think it’s appropriate for the employee to return, 
you may wish to seek guidance from our occupational health service 
(OHS) advice line of – 0141 428 3900, where the employee feels fit to 
return to work before the end of the period specified in their medical 
statement.  
 
 The employee  must  tell you immediately if they’re 
going to be off sick.  
If they’re still sick on the 4th day, the employee must  
tell you that day, and say if their absence is likely to 
continue  beyond  7 days.  
If they’re still sick on the 7th day, the employee , must 
tell you, and provide an update on their condition.  Day 1  
Day 4  If the employee is able 
to return to work  
within 7 days, they 
must complete a 
sickness absence 
certificate as soon as 
they come back.  
Day 7  
If their absence continues for a longer period, the 
employee  must contact you every 7 days, and 
provide an update on their condition.   Day 14+  If they’re absent for 
more than 7 days, the 
employee must  submit 
a fit no te for the 
relevant period  of 
absence,  and upon 
return to work, submit 
a sickness absence  
certificate for the first 
7 days.  
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
11 
Version 4.0     February 2025  EMPLOYMENT ZONE 
You can find more details on the advice line in supporting attendance: 
Occupational Health Service guide for managers .  You may also want 
to consult with your  Service Strategic HR team . 
During the long term absence  
The employee must maintain regular contact with you during any 
continuing period of sickness absence. Regular contact ensures that:  
•They have an opportunity to update you on their health situation.
•You can offer all appropriate forms of help and support to help aid
a return to work.
•You can keep the employee up -to-date with any work
developments or changes.
•You can advise the employee of any management decisions in
relation to their attendance.
You should arrange to meet with the employee regularly on a face -to-face 
basis during their absence, typically, every 4/6 weeks unless this is 
deemed inappropriate . For example, the employee is undergoing 
treatment for a long term illness,  whereby meeting may impact on their 
health.  The employee should also contact you weekly by telephone to 
update you.  
Occupational Sick pay  
Employee s may receive full and half pay, each up to a maximum of 26 
weeks, depending on their length of service as shown in the following 
table :  Previous absences within the rolling year will be taken into consideration. 
You can find more information in our sickness absence: leave and pay  
condition of service. 
Return to work discussions 
In line with policy, you are required to carry out a return to work discussion 
when an employee returns to work after any period of absence . Before the 
meeting , you should have details of the employee’s attendance rec ord and 
be familiar with our policy and the thresholds for an attendance review.  
You should normally do this on the day of their return.  
The purpose of the return to work discussio n is to: 
•Welcome them back and confirm that they’re fit to be back at work.
•Confirm and discuss the nature and reason for their absence, and
if this is likely to happen again.
•Offer any relevant help and support.
•Update them on any developments or changes that may have
taken place while they were absent.
•Confirm whether any further action is required , for example, a
wellbeing support meeting or referral to occupational health.
•Advise them of the consequences of further absences where you
consider that their attendance is giving cause for concern and is
reaching an unsustainable level.
•If necessary, agree with them any actions they will take to improve
their attendance.
•Where appropriate, ensure that the employee completes a
sickness certificate form (self -certification) .
Note: Although this is an informal meeting which does not require 
notification in writing, an employee has the right to be accompanied by a 
colleague or trade union representative.  

OFFICIAL
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL
12 
Version 4.0     February 2025  Self Certification Form (RTW)  
The purpose of the return to work form  is to record details of the 
employee’s absence and confirm that they’re fit to be back at work. Both 
you and the employee should complete the relevant sections of this form 
at the meeting.  
You should record whether you intend to take any further action, for 
example, arrange an Attendance Review , on this form. Both you and the 
employee should sign this form, and you should then ensure that it is 
scanned and sent to CBS to be kept in the employee’s personal file.  
Claims against a third party  
In cases where an employee has  been absent from work due to an injury 
involving a third party (whiplash following a road traffic accident, for 
example) , you should ask the employee whether they intend to make a 
claim against a third party. You should record these details on the 
sickness absence certificate.  
If the employee successfully pursues a claim against the third party, the 
Council expects  to be reimbursed for all sickness allowance paid for that 
absence.  
6.Managing Attendance
Absence categories and Equality Act considerations 
There are two categories of sickness absence within our policy: 
•Short term intermittent absence - this is defined as any period of
sickness absence of up to 19 days. It can include absences thatare covered by a sickness absence certificate and/or a statement 
of fitness for work .   
•Long term absence - this is defined as any period of absence
lasting over 19 days.
Throughout the supporting attendance  process, and where required, 
consideration should be given to the use of appropriate interventions to 
support recovery and return to work for employees.    
When managing either category of absence managers must  be mindful of 
the requirements of the  Equality Act 2010 (Amendment) Regulations 2023 
which makes specific provisions to prevent discrimination against  any 
employee on the  grounds of a  protected characteristic.  Of particular 
relevance to attendance is “disability”.  The Equality Act 2010 identifies a 
person as disabled if they have ‘a physical or mental impairment’ which 
has ‘a substantial and long -term adverse effect’ on their ‘ability to carry out 
normal day -to-day activities’:  
•Impairment  - may be a physical or mental impairment, or
both.
•Long -term  - lasting at least a year, or likely to be for the
rest of the person’s life or recur
•Substantial adverse effect  - more than minor, but it may
fluctuate or change, and may not be present all the time
•Normal day -to-day activities  - not defined by the Act,
but includes things people do in their own time, and are
still able to fully participate in their working life.
Note : Additional information regarding the Equality Act and protected 
characteristics may be found in the Equalities Library.  
Managing disability related sickness absence can be complex and 
managers should consult with their Service Strategic  HR teams in relation 
to such situations.  
Types of absence  
In certain situations, the nature of an employee’s absence will determine 
how you should manage it. We have developed additional guidance to 
help you where the absence is due to  reasons such as pregnancy, alcohol 
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
13 
Version 4.0     February 2025  EMPLOYMENT ZONE 
and drugs and violence at work. You can find more information on 
managing these specific types of absence in our manager’s information 
sheet: specific types of absence. 
We’ve also developed specific guidanc e where absences are due to 
disability, mental heal th problems or stress. This includes guidance on our 
duties under the Equality Act 2010 (Amendment) Regulations 2023. You 
can find more information in supporting attendance: manager’s guide 
to disability, mental health problems and stress . 
Wellbeing Support Meeting  
What is a Wellbeing Support Meeting ? 
A Wellbeing Support Meeting  is about identifying supports and providing 
assistance to an employee at the earliest possible stage of their absence. 
It is crucial that you meet with an employee in the early stages of their 
absence as this can increase the likelihood of a full recovery  and can 
shorten the period of absence. It will apply for specific circumstances as 
below.  
When is a Wellbeing Support Meeting  appropriate?  
Where an employee is absent due to a musculoskeletal or psychological 
condition, you should meet with them at a very early stage to establish 
what forms of support we can offer to assist their recovery. In certain 
cases , early intervention can greatly improve the chance that the 
employee will make a full recovery more quickly.  
You should meet with the employee as soon as possible, within the first 2 
weeks  of the absence starting. As this is a formal attendance meeting, the 
employee should be invited to attend, in writing, advising them of their right 
to be accompanied by a colleague or trade union representative.  For 
template letters, please contact your Service Strategic HR team.  The employee should be issued with a letter after the meeting, confirming 
the details of the discussion and any actions agreed.  
Musculoskeletal conditions  
A musculoskeletal problem may include:  
•Back pain.
•Neck and shoulder pain, including whiplash.
•Upper limb problems, including shoulder, elbow, wrist and hand.
•Lower limb problems, including groin, hip, knee, ankle and foot.
In such cases, a physiotherapist may help the employee to recover and 
speed up a return to work  by providing effective assessment and treatment 
of musculoskeletal conditions, or injuries.   
You should establish whether the employee meets the criteria for a 
musculoskeletal referral via OHS at the meeting. This will be in cases 
where:  
•the employee has a musculoskeletal condition; and
•attendance is currently or is likely to be affected, or work
performance is being affected.
We will normally give priority to employees with a musculoskeletal problem 
as a result of an industrial injury:  
•who are absent; and
•which would improve following treatment and allow an earlier
return to work.
You will receive a report from OHS when you refer an employee to 
physiotherapy, normally after the first and the last session. The report will 
provide advice in relation to:  
•The impact the employee’s condition has on their ability to perform
their full range of duties.
•The length of the course of treatment being provided.
OFFICIAL
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL
14 
Version 4.0     February 2025  •The likely level of recovery.
•Any reasonable adjustments or adaptations that could be made.
•The employee’s recovery (details of this will be covered in the final
report).
Physiotherapy support won’t be provided in cases where the employee is 
receiving physiotherapy from another source. 
Further information 
Our occupational heal th service provides a wide range of services. You 
can find further information on these, including further details of the referral 
process, in supporting attendance: ohs guide for managers .
You can also g et advice and guidance from OHS on the range o f duties 
the employee is fit to do. You may find this information helpful in making 
temporary adjustments to the employee’s duties. This coul d help the 
employee to return to work while still receiving treatment. 
Psychological conditions 
A psychological conditio n may include: 
•stress;
•depression;
•anxiety; or
•some other recognised psychiatric disorder, such as bipolar
disorder.
In such cases, you should: 
•discuss the services available through our employee assistance
provider; and
•establish what 
other forms of help and support could be provided
referring to the Health and Wellbeing Resource Guide .
You should explore and discuss possible solutions with the employee 
where they feel that the workplace is the source of the problem.  You can find further information on this in supporting attendance: 
manager’s guide to disability, mental health problems and stress.  
Note : Long term, clinically diagnosed mental health problems generally 
require longer term clinical support than can be offered via the  Employee 
Assistance Provider.   
Preventing Stress Related Absence  
As a line manager you have a legal duty to protect your team members 
from stress at work by assessing the risk of work -related stress and taking 
reasonable steps to remove or minimise the risks. This is the same duty 
you have to protect your team members f rom other health and safety risks. 
Ensure that you understand your role in the prevention of work related 
stress by taking the 'Stress Course for Managers' on the Council's GOLD 
eLearning platform, and by familiarising yourself with your Service Health 
and Safety Policy and Management Stand ard arrangements, found here . 
If your team member tells you that they are experiencing work -related 
stress, or they are on sick leave because of work -related stress, you must 
carry out an individual stress risk assessment. This will help you to 
understand:  
•what's causing the stress or any potential issues
•what you can do to tackle the causes
Managing Short Term Intermittent Absence 
Where an employee regularly meets the  threshold  for review  as shown 
below, offers of appropriate interventions and support should be made to 
assist the employee to sustain an acceptable level of attendance.   
•3 certified absences within 6 months or 5 certified absences within
12 months. Note : This criteria is not applied on a pro rata basis.
OFFICIAL
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL
15 
Version 4.0     February 2025  •6 working days (or hours equivalent) within 6 months or 8 working
days (or hours equivalent) within 12 months (applied on a pro rata
basis); or
•any period of unauthorised absences*
*Note unauthorised absence will be managed in line with the Discipline &
Appeals Procedure .
Shor t term absences should b e managed through th e Attendance Review 
process. You will me et with an employee where they meet eac h of the 
aforementioned review thresholds .  
Attendanc e Review 
The purpose of this meeting is to allow you and the employee to share 
information abo ut their attendance record.  You are responsibl e for 
conducting an attendance review with the employee. 
The employee has the right to be accompanied by a colleague or trade 
union representativ e at this meeting. You can find more information on 
carrying out the attendance review, including what to do before and at the 
meeting, in our manager’s attendance review meeting checklist. 
Attendance Review 
The purpose of the attendance review meeting checklist is to record 
details of the discussion and the outcome of this . You should comple te the 
relevant sections of this form at the meetin g, making sure that you capture 
the main points of the discussion. Both you and the employee should sign 
this form as an accurate record of wh at was discussed.  If the employee 
refuses to sign the form, you shoul d note this and any reasons given. You 
should then arrange for the completed form to be scanne d and se nt to 
CBS to be kept in the employee’s personal file.  
Attendance Review Outcomes You mus t ensure you apply our supporting attendanc e policy fairly and 
consistently when deciding on the appropriate outcome. You can find the 
range of options available to you on the attendance review meeting  
checklist. 
You mus t arrange to record any further action that yo u intend to take on 
the Attendance Review checklist and follow it up in writing, where 
appropriate. 
Appropria te management interventions or supports should be put in place 
to support an employee to sustai n attendance and have a n acceptable 
level of attendanc e. Where supports have been pu t in place, and an 
employee continues to have a n unacceptabl e level of attendance, an 
employee may require t o be managed under the capability process. 
Managin g Lon g Term Absence 
The employee should maintain regular contact with you during their 
absence. They’ll also need to submit a copy of their statement of fitness 
for work, or ‘fit note’ once they’ve been absent for over 7 calendar days.  
You should manage long term absence through a series of Long Term 
Absenc e Meetings as detailed below. The purpose of this is to provide the 
appropriate hel p and support to enable the employee to return to work 
within a reasonable timescale. It may be that early interventio n through a 
Wellbeing Suppor t Meeting can assist the employee at an early stage. 
You should seek advice and guidance from your Service Strategic HR 
team when dealing wi th long t erm absence cases.  You may also wish to 
seek advice from Occupational Health, and can find full details of the 
referral process and the services available in our supporting attendance: 
Occupational Health Service guide for managers.  
Long Term Absence Meeting 
You should arrange to meet with the employee around the four th week of 
their absence. In cases where the employee is absent due to a 
musculoskeletal or psychological conditio n, you should me et with them as 
OFFICIAL
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL
16 
Version 4.0     February 2025  soon as possible  through a wellbeing support meeting  to establish what 
support and assistance may be required.  
You should meet with the employee on a regular basis  if they remain 
absent , unless deemed inappropriate . For example, the employee is 
undergoing treatment for a long term illness, whereby meeting may impact 
on their health.  As a guide, this will typically be every 4 -6 weeks, 
depending on the circumstances. This provides an opportunity to fully 
discuss their health situation and any support that may be available.  In 
cases where the employee has attended Occupational Health, they should 
be provided with a cop y of the report and this should be discussed in the 
meeting.  
As th is is a formal attendance meeting, the employee should be invited to 
attend, in writing, advising them of their right to be accompanied by a 
colleague  or trade union representative .  
Meetings can take place at the employee’s work location , another Council 
building or via Microsoft Teams . The location of the meeting should be 
agreed to beforehand. However, i t’s not appropriate to meet in public 
places, such as cafes, due to the sensitive nature of the issues being 
discussed.  
Conducting the meeting  
The main purpose of the meeting is to:  
•Discuss the matter fully with the employee.
•Ensure steps are taken to determine the nature of the medical
condition.
•Offer support and assistance to the employee which may aid a return
to work.
You must capture details of the discussion and may wish to use the long  
term absence interview record sheet to do so. You can find full details 
of what you should discuss at the meeting in our manager’s information  
sheet: conducting the long term absence meeting. Confirming discussions in writing  
You’ll need to confirm details of your discussions, including the outcome, 
in writing after the meeting. You can seek advice and guidance on this 
from your Service Strategic HR team . 
7.Facilitating a Return to Work
Management actions  
You should try to assist the employee to return to work by: 
•Continuing to provide support and assistance in line with our
supporting attendance policy  and procedures.
•Consulting with them in considering all reasonable adjustments,
taking into account any recommendations made by OHS or the
employee’s doctor in the statement of fitness for work (or ‘fit
note’).
Types of Supports and Reasonable Adjustments  
You should try, where possible, to accommodate any adjustments 
suggested, bearing in mind your duty to make reasonable adjustments for 
employees who are classed as disabled under the Equality Act.  
You should fully explore all types of reasonable adjustments to assess 
whether they may be appropriate, either on a temporary or long 
term/permanent basis. You should also ensure you confirm these 
discussions in writing to the employee. Where any arrangements are 
made on a temporary basis, you’ll also need to confirm this in writing to the 
employee. You’ll also need to review these on a regular basis, with 
specific agreed timescales built in, depending on the circumstances.  
You may consider:  
OFFICIAL
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL
17 
Version 4.0     February 2025  •Flexible working hours.
•Redesign the job and/or  give some duties to another employee.
•Phased return to work.
•Lighter duties.
•Alternative work.
•Additional training and/or retraining.
•Hybrid working
You can find full details of these options and how they work in practice in 
our manager’s information sheet: types of reasonable adjustments. 
This list is not exhaustive, however, and you may need to look at other 
measures to make sure that you have considered all reasonable 
adjustments. You should contact yo ur Service Strategic HR team for 
advice and guidance in such cases. 
Redeployment 
Even with reasonable adjustments an employee may not be fit to return to 
their existing role due to disability or ill health.  In such cases, 
redeployment to an alternative role should be considered and the 
Redeployment guidance and information utilised. 
Unpaid leave of absence 
Following exhaustion of sickness allowance, Heads of Service may grant a 
period o f unpaid leav e of absence in line wi th our conditions of service in 
relation to sicknes s absence: leave and pay. For exampl e, in cases 
where an employee is long term absen t due to a treatment plan with an 
expected timescale of return.  
You should review this arrangemen t on a regular basis (at least every 
three months), and it shouldn’t last for longer than 1 2 months, unless in 
exceptional circumstances. You should confirm any such agreement in 
writing to the employee.  The employee should continue to submi t a stateme nt of fitness for work 
and maintain regular contact wi th you in line wi th our absence policy, 
advising when they’re likely to return t o work.  
8. Return to work considerations
When th e employe e is able t o return t o work 
You should carry out a return to work discussion when the employee 
returns to work. You can find details on what to do before and during the 
meeting in our manager’s return to work discussion checklist.  
The meeting provides you wi th the opportunity to: 
•Welcome the employee back to work following their long-term
absence.
•Check that they’re fit to return to work.
•Update them on any workplace developments.
•Discuss how any agreed actions will work in practice, for example,
where the employee is returning on lighter duties, or a retraining
programme has been agreed.
You should have regular foll ow up meetings with the employee to review 
their progress, depending on the reason for the employee’s absenc e. It 
also provides an opportunity for the employee t o express how they’re 
finding being back at work . This may be particularly important where the 
employee has been absent due to work related stress or another 
psychological condition . You should take a note o f these meetings in 
helping you to review their progress. You can find further information on 
psychological conditions in supporting attendance: manager’s guide to 
disability, mental health problems and stress.  
Pay 
OFFICIAL
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL
18 
Version 4.0     February 2025  You should confirm any changes to the employee’s pay, if appropriate. 
This may be in cases where, for example, the employee has returned to 
work on a part -time basis . 
Reduction of annual leave 
Under the Working Time Regulations 1998 (as amended), all workers are 
entitled to a statutory minimum of 5.6 weeks (28 days) paid leave each 
year. This can include paid public holidays. This entitlement is pro -rated 
for part time workers.  
Where an employee is absent from work through sickness absence for a 
single period of over 13 weeks in a single leave year or spanning leave 
years, their entitlement to leave within the leave year should be reduced 
proportionately, providing that the emplo yee receives the statutory 
minimum annual leave entitlement in each leave year.  If you have queries 
in relation to the calculating the reduction, you should contact your 
Strategic HR.  
Examples: 
Jim was absent between 3rd January and 10th April and has 7 years’ 
service.  As the absence duration was 14 weeks, he would face a 
reduction. Jim’s complete months worked would total 8 as he was only 
absent between January and April. Therefore, his entitlement according to 
the grid is 19.5 days (+11.5 public holidays). Jim’s total  entitlement for the 
leave year is 31 days. So, Jim has met the statutory minimum requirement. 
Pam was absent between 1st March and 2nd August meaning that her 
complete months worked was 5 months and has 2 years’ service. 
Therefore, she would face a reduction to 11 days (+11.5 public holidays). 
Pam’s total entitlement for the year is 22.5 days. Pam has not reached the 
statutory minimum of 28 days. So, this would be adjusted to 28 days.  
For term -time staff, please refer to the appropriate management circular. 
Where an employee is unable to use their entitlement to statutory leave 
due to sickness absence within the leave year, the employee should be allowed to carry forward the untaken balance of statutory entitlement into 
the next leave year. The carry forward of leave into the new leave year 
only applies to the untaken balance of statutory leave, not the balance of 
untaken contractual leave provided  for in the Council’s conditions of 
service. You should contact your Service Strategic HR team  for advice and 
guidance in such cases.  
Disciplinary considerations 
Disciplinary action may be considered if there are breaches of conduct at 
any stage of the supporting attendance proce dure (including the return to 
work process) in accordance with the Council’s Discipline and Appeals 
Procedure such as;  
•unauthorised absence,
•a failure to comply with absence reporting procedures,
•an abuse of the sick pay provisions,
•fraudulent conduct
9.Capability considerations  & Ill health  retiral
considerations
When the employee is unable to return to work or 
sustain an acceptable level of attendance 
You should fully explore all options in helping an employee to return to 
work or sustain an acceptable level of attendance, as outlined in section 9 
of this guide. You should discuss this regularly with the employee during 
the course of their absence, confirming the details in writing.   
You should also, where appropriate, advise the employee of the potential 
outcome in cases where they’re unable to return to work and improve their 
attendance. You’ll have to consider their continued employment with us in 
such cases.  
OFFICIAL
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL
19 
Version 4.0     February 2025  While you should make every effort to help and support an employee who 
is absent or unable to sustain an acceptable level of attendance, there are 
times when they remain unfit for work. If so, you should first explore 
whether ill health retiral may be an o ption.  
Ill health retiral 
Ill health retiral (excluding teachers)  
Ill health retiral is only available to employees who are members of 
Strathclyde pension fund. You’ll need to make a referral to OHS to 
determine whether the employee meets the criteria for ill health retiral. 
OHS will also assess how likely it is that the employee will be capable of 
working at some point in the future. Ill health retiral has two tiers:  
•Tier 1 – where the employee is unlikely to work again before age
65.
•Tier 2 – where the employee has a reasonable prospect of
working again before 65.
The option selected affects the benefits paid to the employee by the 
pension fund.  
Granting ill health retiral  
Approval must be sought from an approved qualified medical practitioner 
on whether the employee meets the eligibility criteria. You should contact 
your Service Strategic HR team  as soon as possible for advice . 
Appeals An employee can appeal against a decision not to grant ill health retiral. If 
we can’t resolve the complaint, the employee can use the Internal 
Disputes Resolution Procedures (IDRP). You can get further information 
on the procedure from the Strathclyde  pension fund , or by contacting 
your Service Strategic HR team . 
Teachers  
If the employee is a teacher, then an application should be made to the 
Scottish Public Pensions Agency  (SPPA), together with supporting 
medical information. You can get further details on this from the SPPA, or 
by contacting the HR team within Education Services.  
Capability dismissal
Where all reasonable options have been explored, and the employee 
cannot return to work, or maintain a satisfactory level of attendance , the 
employee should be progressed to a lack of capability hearing . You may 
have to consider the option of dismissal on capability grounds where:  
•the employee doesn’t meet the criteria for ill health retiral;
•you have explored all options of support; and
•the employee is still unable to return to work or sustain an
acceptable level of attendance.
This means that an employee’s contract of employment is terminated as 
they’re not fit to carry out their duties or attend work on a regular basis due 
to ill health.  
Dismissal due to ill health is a potentially fair reason for dismissal. 
Before considering capability dismissal, you will have:  
•Sought advice and guidance from your Service Strategic HR
team .
OFFICIAL
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
OFFICIAL
20 
Version 4.0     February 2025  •Met with the employee face to face on a regular basis.
•Given the employee the opportunity to put their side forward.
•Issued letters confirming the discussions that have taken place at
these meetings.
•Sought up to date advice from OHS , where appropriate .
•Considered reasonable offers of support to aid a return to work.
•Explored options such as a phased return or lighter duties that
may enable a return to work.
•Explored whether the employee is eligible for ill health retiral.
•Advised the employee in writing of the potential outcome of
dismissal should they be unable to improve their attendance and
sustain attendance at work.
Grounds for dismissal  
Capability dismissal may be appropriate in cases where:  
•you can no longer sustain the level of absence;
•you have exhausted all other options of support;
•the employee is unable to give an indication of a return to work
within the foreseeable future  or has been unable to sustain an
acceptable level of attendance ; and
•the employee doesn’t meet the criteria for ill health retiral.
Terminal illness  
You may have to suspend any decision to dismiss in cases where an 
employee has been diagnosed as having a terminal illness. You need to 
consider such situations carefully and deal with them sensitively, taking 
the circumstances into account. You should see k advice from your Service 
Strategic HR team  in such cases.  
Inviting the employee to the meeting  
You’ll need to advise the employee both verbally and in writing when you 
have reached the point where you’re considering terminating their contract 
on capability grounds. You should be clear in your letter that a potential outcome of the meeting may be dismissal. You should also advise the 
employee of their right to be accompanied by a colleague or trade union 
representative. You r Strategic Service HR team can provide a template 
invite letter.  
Reaching a decision  
The Chair should consider each case on its own merits before reaching a 
decision. To help reach  a decision, the following will be  consider ed: 
•Length of the absence and whether a return to work in the
foreseeable future is likely.
•Reason for the absence.
•Attendance history.
•Effect of the disability or underlying health problem on their ability
to carry out their current duties .
•Effect of the absence on the service and/or section.
Advice and guidance should be sought from S trategic  HR prior to a 
decision being made.  
Confirming the decision  
You should confirm the employee’s dismissal in writing, along with final 
pay arrangements and advise them of their right to appeal against th e  
decision  of dismissal and where appropriate, their right to appeal against 
the decision not to grant ill health retiral from the Strathclyde Pension 
Scheme .  
Appeals against dismissal  
If the employee considers their dismissal unfair, they may appeal, in 
writing, to the Head of Human Resources within 14 days of receiving their 
letter confirming the decision.  The Personnel Appeals Committee, made 
up of a panel of Elected Members (Councillors), will hear the appeal.    
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
21 
Version 4.0     February 2025  EMPLOYMENT ZONE 
You can read our Code of discipline, disciplinary and appeals 
procedure for full details of the appeals procedure. 
10.Further guidance /index
You can get further guidance on this, or any aspect of the supporting  
attendance toolkit, from your Service Strategic HR team . 
Policies  
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
22 
Version 4.0     February 2025  EMPLOYMENT ZONE 
Supporting attendance policy 
Bullying and harassment policy 
Flexible working procedure 
Alcohol and Drugs Support Policy 
Work life balance policy 
Code of practice on the employment of disabled people 
Employment of disabled persons policy 
Gambling Harms Support Policy 
Conditions of service  
Code of discipline, disciplinary and appeals procedure 
Sickness absence: leave and pay 
Forms  
Attendance review meeting checklist 
Sickness absence certificate  
Statement of fitness for work (sample)  
Long term absence meeting record sheet 
Guides  
Supporting attendance: ohs guide for managers  
Supporting attendance: manager’s guide to occupational health 
Supporting attendance: manager’s guide to disability, mental health 
problems and stress  
Redeployment guidance and information
Supporting attendance: employee guide 
Supporting employees subjected to gender-based violence 
Guide to the Menopause and the Workplace  
Information sheets  
Manager’s information sheet: conducting the absence interview 
Manager’s information sheet: types of reasonable adjustments Manager’s information sheet: specific types of absence  
Checklists  
Manager’s checklist for employees who report absent 
Manager’s return to work discussion checklist 
Manager’s attendance review meeting checklist 
Links  
Employee assistance provider 
Occupational health service  
Scottish public pension s agency 
Strathclyde pension fund 
Improving the Cancer Journey (ICJ) 
