EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
 
1 
Version 3.0                         March  2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Corporate HR - Guide  to the Menopause and  
the Workplace  
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
2 
Version 3.0                         March  2023  
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
 
Menopause and the Workplace  
Purpose of this guide  
 
2. WHAT IS THE MENOPAUSE ? 
 
3. SYMPTOMS OF THE MENOPAUSE  
 
4. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES  
 
The role of the employee  
The role of the manager  
 
5. SUPPORTING EMPLOYEES  
 
Managers’ guidance for colleague discussions  
Symptoms support  
 
6. RELATED POLICIES &  GUIDANCE  
 
7. FURTHER SUPPORT & GUIDANCE
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
3 
Version 3.0                         March  2023 1. Introduction  
 
Menopause and the Workplace  
 
This guide has been developed to provide information to 
employees and their managers about the menopause and 
how the organisation can support women experiencing 
symptoms of the menopause.  
 
Purpose of this guide  
 
The Council understands the difficulties and anxieties which 
are faced by women going through the me nopause and this 
guidance is to make managers and colleagues aware of 
menopause related issues and how they can support affected 
women by creating an environment where women feel 
comfortable enough to raise issues about their symptoms and 
ask for reasonabl e adjustments at work.  
 
By informing managers about the potential symptoms of 
menopause  and their consequences , they can support 
employees in the workplace by following the principles 
outlined in this guide.  
 
 
The guide is also relevant for line managers, partners and 
colleagues.   About 70% of the council’s workforce are female, 
therefore while you might not be directly experiencing the 
menopause, there is a very strong likelihood that you may 
work with a collea gue who is.  
 2. What is the Menopause?  
 
The Menopause is defined as a biological stage in a woman's 
life that occurs when she stops menstruating, and reaches the 
end of her natural reproductive life. The menopause is 
sometimes known as the ‘change of life’ an d it is defined as 
having occurred when a woman has not had a period for 
twelve consecutive months (for women reaching menopause 
naturally). The average age for a woman to reach menopause 
is 51, however, it can be earlier or later than this due to 
surgery,  illness or other reasons. As a result of these 
hormonal changes, many women experience both physical 
and emotional symptoms.  
 
The time leading up to menopause is called the peri-
menopause.  During this time, a woman may experience 
changes, such as irregul ar periods or other menopausal 
symptoms. This can be years before menopause.  
 
Following the menopause, starting when a woman has not 
had a period for twelve consecutive months, is referred to as 
Post-menopause.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
4 
Version 3.0                         March  2023 3. Symptoms of the Menopause  
 
All women will experience the menopause in their life, most 
commonly during their working life.  The symptoms of the 
menopause and their severity vary from woman to woman.  
  
Symptoms can manifest both physically and psychologically 
including, hot flushes, sweats, poor concentration, insomnia, 
headaches, panic attacks, heavy/light periods, anxiety, and 
loss of confidence. Some women also experience difficulty 
sleeping.  
 
Approximately 75% of women do experience some 
symptoms, and 25% could be classed as sever e, it is 
important to note that not every woman will notice every 
symptom, or even need help or support.  
 
4. Roles and Responsibilities  
 
Both employees and line managers have a role and 
responsibilities to ensure that appropriate workplace support  
is explored.  
  
The role of the employee  
 
All employees are responsible for:  
 
• Taking personal responsibility to look after their health  
and wellbeing ; 
• Being open and honest in conversations with line 
managers about their health.  If a member of staff feels unable to speak to their line 
manager they can speak to another manager, their trade 
union representative or our Employee Assistance Provider.  
 
The role of the line manager  
 
All line managers should:  
 
• Familiarise themselves with this Menopause guidan ce; 
• Create a supportive working environment;  
• Be ready and willing to have open discussions about 
menopause, appreciating the personal nature of the 
conversation, and treating the discussion sensitively 
and professionally;  
• Discuss and agree with the individ ual how best they 
can be supported, and any adjustments required  
• Implement agreed adjustments and review as required.  
 
If a line manager feels uncomfortable discussing a delicate 
health matter with an employee they may wish to utilise our 
employee assistance provider, PAM Assist , who can give 
advice on how to approach a difficult conversation with an 
employee .  
 
PAM Assist may be contacted on the normal EAP telephone 
number: 0800 247 1100.  
 
In circumstances where the line manager requires advice from  
a medical practitioner, they may wish to contact our 
Occupational Health Service’ occupational health helpline 
OHS help line: 0141 428 3900.  
 
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
5 
Version 3.0                         March  2023 5. Support ing employees  
 
Managers’ Guidance for colleague discussions  
 
We recognise that every woman is different, and it is, 
therefore, not feasible to set out a struct ured set of specific 
guidelines for all scenarios  however the princ iples below 
should be followed to identify appropriate support.  
 
If an employee wishes to speak about their symptoms, or just 
to talk about how they are feeling ( as they may not recognise 
the symptoms ), or if a male employee wishes to speak about 
a family member, please ensure that you:  
 
• Allow adequate time to have the conversation;  
• Find an appropriate room to preserve confidentiality;  
• Encourage them to speak openly and honestly;  
• Suggest ways in which they can be supported (see 
symptoms below)  
• Agree act ions, and how to implement them;  
• Agree if other members of the team should be 
informed, and by whom;  
• Ensure that designated time is allowed for a follow up 
meeting.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Symptoms Support  
 
Symptoms can manifest both physically and psychologically, 
including, but not exhaustively or exclusively; support for 
women should be considered as detailed below:  
 
 
 Symptom  Possible Adjustments  
Hot Flushes  
 • Request temperature control for their work area, 
such as a fan on their desk or moving near a 
window, or away from a heat source;  
• Easy access to drinking water;  
• Be allowed to adapt prescribed uniform, such as by 
removing a jacket;  
• Have access to a rest ro om for breaks if their work 
involves long periods of standing or sitting, or a quiet 
area if they need to manage a severe flush.  
Heavy /  
Light Periods  
 • Have access to toilet facilities;  
• Request an extra uniform.  
 
Headaches  
 • Have ease of access to fresh drinking water;  
• Offer a quiet space to work;  
• Have time out to take medication if needed.  
Difficulty 
Sleeping  
 • Ask to be considered for flexible working, particularly 
when suffering from a lack of sleep.  
Low Mood  
 • Agree s hort micro break to allow access to natural 
light/fresh air to help lift and improve mood . 
 
EMPLOYMENT ZONE  
6 
Version 3.0                         March  2023 Where agreed adjustments are unsuccessful, or if symptoms 
are pr oving more problematic, the line m anager may  consider 
referring the employee for an occupational health 
assessment.  
  
6. Related Policies & Guides  
 
The links below provide further relevant information in our 
conditions of service and guidance documents on Connect:  
 
• Flexible working procedure  
• Work life balance policy  
• Employee Handbook  
• Leave  
• Maximising attendance policy  
• Sickness absence: leave a nd pay  
 
 
 
7. Further Support & Information  
 
Our employee assistance provider,  PAM Assist , can provide 
relevant support and information to employees.  
 
• You can phone PAM Assist  any day, any time, free 
on: 0800 247 1100.  
• You can e -mail PAM Assist  at either 
info@pamwellbeing.co.uk  or 
mailto:counsellingteam@pamassist.co.uk  
 Full de tails of the methods of contact Workplace Options, 
including iOS and Android apps are available on Connect . 
Information is also available from other organisations:  
 
• www.nhs.uk/conditions/menopause  
• menopausematters.co.uk  
• www.womens -health -concern.org/help -and-
advice/factsheets/menopause  
 
 
