OFFICIAL  
Supporting attendance  toolkit  
Manager’s information sheet: conducting the absence interview  
 
OFFICIAL  
Version 2.0                                                    1                                                  February 2025                               
 
Introduction  
 
We’ve developed this  information sheet to outline the types of discussions that should take 
place with the employee during the long term absence interview . You should read this 
information in  conjunction with  the guidance contained within  supporting attendance: 
manager’s guide.  
 
Purpose  of the absence interview  
 
The main purpose of the absence interview is  to: 
 
• Fully discuss the employee’s absence.  
• Ensure steps are taken to determine the nature of the medical condition.  
• Offer support and assistance to the employee which may aid a return to work.  
 
Key discussion points  
 
You should discuss the following with the employee when conducting the absence  
Interview:  
 
Confirm 
condition  You should ask the employee to confirm the nature of their condition 
(you should already know why the employee is absent as they will be 
keeping in contact with you as required under our procedures; 
however, this can change during a period of absence).  
 
Medication:  You should find out what medication the employee has been 
prescribed, and any side effects. This is  particularly important when 
an employee is close to returning to work  where , for example , they 
operate  machinery and the medication can cause  drowsiness.  
 
Further tests:  Where the employee’s prognosis isn’t clear, you should ask them if 
they have  been referred to a consultant or to hospital for tests , and 
when these will take place. You may find this information helpful in 
deciding when to refer the employee to our occupational health 
service (OHS).  
 
Where hospital tests, investigations or consultant ’s appointment s are 
due in the near future, you’ll find that it’s usually better to wait until 
after these appointments before seeki ng advice from occupational 
health . This means that OHS are then able to access the most up to 
date medical information.  
 
 
 
 
OFFICIAL  
Supporting attendance  toolkit  
Manager’s information sheet: conducting the absence interview  
 
OFFICIAL  
Version 2.0                                                    2                                                  February 2025                               
 
 
 
Occupational 
health referral:  In cases where you are referring an employee to OHS, you should 
discuss the reasons with them. You can find further details , including 
the referral process,  in supporting attendance: managers guide.  
 
Employee’s 
feelings about 
condition:  Each person will react in their own way when  suffering from a health 
problem . You should discuss this with the employee  to see if we could  
offer any form of support, such as the services available through our 
employee assistance provider  (EAP).   
 
Employee’s 
feelings about 
returning to  
work:  Employees can often feel anxious about returning to work after a long 
absence. You should discuss this with the employee, and offer 
support to help reassure them about their return. This could take the 
form of a phased return or limited workload, or advising them of the 
counselling services available.  
 
Expected return  
to work date:  You should ask the employee when they feel they will be fit to return 
to work. While this can change over  time, it gives you an idea of how 
they feel about returning.  
 
You can also discuss any action that you may need to take before 
they return to work. This could include any adjustments recommended 
by their doctor, or any other changes that may help. You can find 
more information on this in our manager’s information sheet: types 
of reasonable adjustments . 
 
Confirm 
capability to 
work on full 
capacity or 
restricted duties:  You should establish whether the employee will be fit to return to their 
full range of duties or restricted duties. You may be able to get this 
information from their doctor, or following a referral to OHS. You 
should discuss and agree timescales w here restricted duties are 
required . 
  
Follow up 
interview:  You should advise the employee that you will meet with them again if 
there’s no return to work. You should meet the employee regularly, 
around every 4 -6 weeks or so, where appropriate.  
 
Pay:  You should confirm sick pay details with the employee, including, 
where appropriate, the dates when they will go on to half pay and then 
no pay. You can find further guidance on this in our sickness 
absence: leave and pay  conditions of service.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
OFFICIAL  
Supporting attendance  toolkit  
Manager’s information sheet: conducting the absence interview  
 
OFFICIAL  
Version 2.0                                                    3                                                  February 2025                               
 
 
 
Management 
decisions:  You may have to discuss future possible managemen t decisions with 
the employee, where appropriate. These options include :  
 
• ill health retira l; and  
• termination of employment  on the grounds of capability.  
 
You should seek advice from your service HR team in such cases. 
You can find further information on these options and what they mean 
later in supporting attendance: managers guide.  
 
 
You should confirm details of these discussions, including the outcome,  in writing  to 
the employee after the  meeting.  
 
Further guidance  
 
Further guidance on this, or any aspect of the supporting attendance toolkit, is 
available from your Service Strategic HR team.  
 
 
